[[!meta title="Connecting a VoIP phone directly to an Asterisk server"]]
[[!meta date="2019-02-28T22:25:00.000-08:00"]]
[[!meta license="[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)"]]

On my [Asterisk](https://www.asterisk.org/) server, I happen to have two
on-board ethernet boards. Since I only used one of these, I decided to move
my VoIP phone from the local network switch to being connected directly to
the Asterisk server.

The main advantage is that this phone, running proprietary software of
unknown quality, is no longer available on my general home network. Most
importantly though, it no longer has access to the Internet, without my
having to firewall it manually.

Here's how I configured everything.

# Private network configuration

On the server, I started by giving the second network interface a static IP
address in `/etc/network/interfaces`:

    auto eth1
    iface eth1 inet static
        address 192.168.2.2
        netmask 255.255.255.0

On the VoIP phone itself, I set the static IP address to `192.168.2.3` and
the DNS server to `192.168.2.2`. I then updated the SIP registrar IP address
to `192.168.2.2`.

The DNS server actually refers to an [unbound
daemon](https://feeding.cloud.geek.nz/posts/setting-up-your-own-dnssec-aware/)
running on the Asterisk server. The only configuration change I had to make
was to listen on the second interface and allow the VoIP phone in:

    server:
        interface: 127.0.0.1
        interface: 192.168.2.2
        access-control: 0.0.0.0/0 refuse
        access-control: 127.0.0.1/32 allow
        access-control: 192.168.2.3/32 allow

Finally, I opened the right ports on the server's firewall in
`/etc/network/iptables.up.rules`:

    -A INPUT -s 192.168.2.3/32 -p udp --dport 5060 -j ACCEPT
    -A INPUT -s 192.168.2.3/32 -p udp --dport 10000:20000 -j ACCEPT

# Network time synchronization

In order for the phone to update its clock automatically using [NTP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_Time_Protocol), I installed [chrony](https://chrony.tuxfamily.org/) on the Asterisk server:

    apt install chrony

then I configured it to listen on the private network interface and allow access from the VoIP phone by adding the following to `/etc/chrony/chrony.conf`:

    bindaddress 192.168.2.2
    allow 192.168.2.3

Finally, I opened the right firewall port by adding a new rule to `/etc/network/iptables.up.rules`:

    -A INPUT -p udp -s 192.168.2.3 --dport 123 -j ACCEPT

# Accessing the admin page

Now that the VoIP phone is no longer available on the local network, it's
not possible to access its admin page. That's a good thing from a security
point of view, but it's somewhat inconvenient.

Therefore I put the following in my `~/.ssh/config` to make the admin page
available on `http://localhost:8081` after I connect to the Asterisk server
via ssh:

    Host asterisk
        LocalForward 8081 192.168.2.3:80

[[!tag debian]] [[!tag asterisk]] [[!tag ubuntu]] [[!tag ntp]]
