[[!meta title="Disabling mail sending from your domain"]]
[[!meta date="2020-04-23T22:10:00.000-07:00"]]
[[!meta license="[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)"]]

I noticed that I was receiving some bounced email notifications from a
domain I own (`cloud.geek.nz`) to host my blog. These notifications were all
for spam messages spoofing the `From` address since I do not use that domain
for email.

I decided to try setting a strict [DMARC
policy](https://dmarcly.com/blog/how-to-implement-dmarc-dkim-spf-to-stop-email-spoofing-phishing-the-definitive-guide)
to see if DMARC-using mail servers (e.g. GMail) would then drop these
spoofed emails without notifying me about it.

I started by setting this initial DMARC policy in DNS in order to monitor the change:

    @ TXT v=spf1 -all
    _dmarc TXT v=DMARC1; p=none; ruf=mailto:dmarc@fmarier.org; sp=none; aspf=s; fo=0:1:d:s;

Then I waited three weeks without receiving anything before updating the
relevant DNS records to this final DMARC policy:

    @ TXT v=spf1 -all
    _dmarc TXT v=DMARC1; p=reject; sp=reject; aspf=s;

This policy states that nobody is allowed to send emails for this domain and
that any incoming email claiming to be from this domain should be silently
rejected.

I haven't noticed any bounce notifications for messages spoofing this domain
in a while, so maybe it's working?

## DKIM

[Cloudflare suggests](https://blog.cloudflare.com/tackling-email-spoofing/)
also including an invalid
[DKIM](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4871) record:

    *._domainkey TXT v=DKIM1; p=

and referring to it in the DMARC record via `adkim=s`:

    _dmarc TXT v=DMARC1; p=reject; sp=reject; adkim=s; aspf=s;

I'm not sure why a mail server would correctly handle DKIM but not SPF
since the former is more complicated. Maybe this is not really
necessary and is merely a belt-and-suspender kind of approach.

## Null MX

If you look at the MX record for `example.com`:

    $ dig MX example.com
    example.com.		86400	IN	MX	0 .

This odd-looking `MX` record is actually following
[RFC7505](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7505) and is the correct
way to indicate that a domain doesn't **accept** incoming emails.

While this is the opposite of what I set out to do, the RFC suggests that
some mail servers will refuse incoming emails claiming to be from domains
with a Null `MX` record on the basis that legitimate email senders have
valid return addresses.

This sounds like a good idea to add to a domain that isn't sending emails.

[[!tag sysadmin]] [[!tag debian]] [[!tag dns]] [[!tag email]]
