[[!meta title="Encrypted mailing list on Debian and Ubuntu"]]
[[!meta date="2014-09-29T22:30:00.000-07:00"]]
[[!meta license="[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)"]]

Running an encrypted mailing list is surprisingly tricky. One of the first
challenges is that you need to decide what the threat model is. Are you
worried about someone compromising the list server? One of the subscribers
stealing the list of subscriber email addresses? You can't just "turn on
encryption", you have to think about what you're trying to defend against.

I decided to use [schleuder](https://schleuder2.nadir.org/). Here's how I
set it up.

# Requirements

What I decided to create was a mailing list where people could subscribe
and receive emails encrypted to them from the list itself. In order to
post, they need to send an email encrypted to the list' public key and
signed using the private key of a subscriber.

What the list then does is decrypt the email and encrypts it individually
for each subscriber. This protects the emails while in transit, but is
vulnerable to the list server itself being compromised since every list email
transits through there at some point in plain text.

# Installing the schleuder package

The first thing to know about installing schleuder on Debian or Ubuntu is
that at the moment it unfortunately depends on ruby 1.8. This means that you
can only install it on Debian wheezy or Ubuntu precise: trusty and jessie
won't work (until schleuder is ported to a more recent version of ruby).

If you're running wheezy, you're fine, but if you're running precise, I
recommend adding
[my ppa](https://launchpad.net/~fmarier/+archive/ubuntu/ppa?field.series_filter=precise)
to your `/etc/apt/sources.list` to get a version of schleuder that actually
lets you create a new list without throwing an error.

Then, simply install this package:

    apt-get install schleuder

# Postfix configuration

The next step is to configure your mail server (I use [postfix](http://www.postfix.org/)) to
handle the schleuder lists.

This may be obvious but if you're like me and you're repurposing a server
which hasn't had to accept incoming emails, make sure that postfix is set
to the following in `/etc/postfix/main.cf`:

    inet_interfaces = all

Then follow the instructions from
[/usr/share/doc/schleuder/README.Debian](http://sources.debian.net/src/schleuder/2.2.1-2%2Bdeb7u1/debian/README.Debian/#L86)
and finally add the following line (thanks to the [wiki
instructions](https://schleuder2.nadir.org/contrib/postfix_transport.html))
to `/etc/postfix/main.cf`:

    local_recipient_maps = proxy:unix:passwd.byname $alias_maps $transport_maps

# Creating a new list

Once everything is set up, creating a new list is pretty easy. Simply run
`schleuder-newlist list@example.org` and follow the instructions.

After creating your list, remember to update `/etc/postfix/transports` and
run `postmap /etc/postfix/transports`.

Then you can test it by sending an email to
`LISTNAME-sendkey@example.com`. You should receive the list's public key.

# Adding list members

Once your list is created, the list admin is the only subscriber. To add
more people, you can send an [admin
email](http://sources.debian.net/src/schleuder/2.2.1-2%2Bdeb7u1/debian/README.Debian/#L29)
to the list or follow [these
instructions](https://schleuder2.nadir.org/contrib/creating_lists_with_postfix.html)
to do it manually:

1. Get the person's GPG key: `gpg --recv-key KEYID`
2. Verify that the key is trusted: `gpg --fingerprint KEYID`
3. Add the person to the list's `/var/lib/schleuder/HOSTNAME/LISTNAME/members.conf`:
       - email: francois@fmarier.org
         key_fingerprint: 8C470B2A0B31568E110D432516281F2E007C98D1
4. Export the public key: `gpg --export -a KEYID`
5. Paste the exported key into the list's keyring:

       sudo -u schleuder gpg --homedir /var/lib/schleuder/HOSTNAME/LISTNAME/ --import

# Signing the list key

In order to give assurance to list members that the list key is legitimate,
it should be signed by the list admin.

1. Export the key:

       sudo -u schleuder gpg --homedir /var/lib/schleuder/HOSTNAME/LISTNAME/ -a --export LISTNAE@HOSTNAME > ~/LISTNAME.asc
2. Copy the key onto your own machine using scp and import it: `gpg --import < LISTNAME.asc`
3. Sign the key locally by editing the key `gpg --edit-key KEYID` and using the `sign` command.
4. Export your signature: `gpg -a --export KEYID > LISTNAME.asc`
5. Copy the signed key back onto the server using scp.
6. Import your signature into the schleuder public keyring:

       sudo -u schleuder gpg --homedir /var/lib/schleuder/HOSTNAME/LISTNAME/ --import < ~/LISTNAME.asc

After that, anybody requesting the list key will get your signature as well.

[[!tag debian]] [[!tag security]] [[!tag gpg]]
