[[!meta title="Tweaking Cookies For Privacy in Firefox"]]
[[!meta date="2015-12-07T17:45:00.000-05:00"]]
[[!meta license="[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)"]]

Cookies are an important part of the Web since they are the primary
mechanism that websites use to maintain user sessions. Unfortunately, they
are also abused by surveillance marketing companies to follow you around the
Web. Here are a few things you can do in Firefox to protect your privacy.

# Cookie Expiry

Cookies are sent from the website to your browser via a `Set-Cookie` HTTP header on the
response. It looks like this:

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Date: Mon, 07 Dec 2015 16:55:43 GMT
    Server: Apache
    Set-Cookie: SESSIONID=65576c6c64206e6f2c657920756f632061726b636465742065686320646f2165
    Content-Length: 2036
    Content-Type: text/html;charset=UTF-8

When your browser sees this, it saves that cookie for the given hostname and
keeps it until you close the browser.

Should a site want to persist their cookie for longer, they can add an
`Expires` *attribute*:

    Set-Cookie: SESSIONID=65576c...; expires=Tue, 06-Dec-2016 22:38:26 GMT

in which case the browser will retain the cookie until the server-provided
expiry date (which could be in a few years). Of course, that's if you don't
instruct your browser to do things differently.

## Controlling Cookie Expiry

In order to change your cookie settings, you must open the Firefox
preferences, click on "Privacy" and then choose "Use custom settings for
history" under the "History" heading.

There, you will have the ability to **turn off cookies entirely**
(`network.cookie.cookieBehavior = 2`), which I don't recommend you do in
your browser since you won't be able to login anywhere. On the other hand,
turning off cookies is what I do (and recommend) in Thunderbird since
I can't think of a legitimate reason for an email to leave a cookie in my
mail client.

Another control you'll find there is "Keep until" which defaults to honoring
the server-provided expiry ("they expire" aka `network.cookie.lifetimePolicy
= 0`) or making them **expire at the end of the browsing session** ("I close
Firefox" aka `network.cookie.lifetimePolicy = 2`).

A third option is available if you type `about:config` into your URL bar
and looking for the `network.cookie.lifetimePolicy` preference. Setting this to
`3` will honor the server-provided expiry up to a **maximum lifetime of 90
days**. You can also make that 90 days be anything you want by changing the
`network.cookie.lifetime.days` preference.

Regardless of the settings you choose, you can always tell Firefox to clear
cookies when you close it by selecting the "Clear history when Firefox
closes" checkbox, clicking the "Settings" button and making sure that
"Cookies" is selected (`privacy.clearOnShutdown.cookies = true`). This could
be useful for example if you'd like to ensure that cookies never last longer
than 5 days but are also cleared whenever you shut down Firefox.

# Third-Party Cookies

So far, we've only looked at first-party cookies: the ones set by the
website you visit and which are typically used to synchronize your login
state with the server.

There is however another kind: third-party cookies. These ones are set by
the third-party resources that a page loads. For example, if a page loads
JavaScript from a third-party ad network, you can be pretty confident that
they will set their own cookie in order to build a profile on you and serve
you "better and more relevant ads".

## Controlling Third-Party Cookies

If you'd like to opt out of these, you have a couple of options. The first
one is to **turn off third-party cookies entirely** by going back into the
Privacy preferences and selecting "Never" next to the "Accept third-party
cookies" setting (`network.cookie.cookieBehavior = 1`). Unfortunately,
turning off third-party cookies entirely tends to break a number of sites
which rely on this functionality (for example as part of their for login
process).

A more forgiving option is to accept third-party cookies **only for sites
which you have actually visited directly**. For example, if you visit Facebook
and login, you will get a cookie from them. Then when you visit other sites
which include Facebook widgets they will not recognize you unless you allow
cookies to be sent in a third-party context. To do that, choose the "From
visited" option (`network.cookie.cookieBehavior = 3`). However, note that
a **few payment gateways are still relying on arbitrary third-party cookies**
and will break unless you keep the default (`network.cookie.cookieBehavior = 0`).

In addition to this setting, you can also choose to make all third-party
cookies automatically expire when you close Firefox by setting the
`network.cookie.thirdparty.sessionOnly` option to `true` in `about:config`.

## Other Ways to Limit Third-Party Cookies

Another way to limit undesirable third-party cookies is to tell the browser
to avoid connecting to trackers in the first place. This functionality is
now
[built into Private Browsing mode](https://blog.mozilla.org/blog/2015/11/03/firefox-now-offers-a-more-private-browsing-experience/)
and enabled by default. To enable it outside of Private Browsing too, simply
go into `about:config` and set `privacy.trackingprotection.enabled` to
`true`.

You could also install the EFF's
[Privacy Badger](https://www.eff.org/privacybadger) add-on which uses
heuristics to detect and block trackers, unlike Firefox
[tracking protection](https://feeding.cloud.geek.nz/posts/how-tracking-protection-works-in-firefox/)
which uses a blocklist of known trackers.

# My Recommended Settings

On my work computer I currently use the following:

    network.cookie.cookieBehavior = 0
    network.cookie.lifetimePolicy = 3
    network.cookie.lifetime.days = 5
    network.cookie.thirdparty.sessionOnly = true
    privacy.trackingprotection.enabled = true

which allows me to stay logged into most sites for the whole week (no matter
now often I restart [Firefox Nightly](https://nightly.mozilla.org/)) while
limiting tracking and other undesirable cookies as much as possible.

[[!tag firefox]] [[!tag debian]] [[!tag nzoss]] [[!tag mozilla]] [[!tag privacy]]
